README.md, before:

# Quarkus QE Test Framework

The framework is designed using Extension Model architecture patterns, so supporting additional features or deployment options like Kubernetes or AWS is just a matter of implementing extension points and providing the new Maven module in the classpath.

![Components](docs/components.png)

Main features:
- Easily deploy multiple Quarkus applications and third party components in a single test
- Write the test case once and run it everywhere (cloud, bare metal, etc)
- Developer and Test friendly
- Quarkus features focused (allow to define custom source classes, build/runtime properties, etc)
- Test isolation: for example, in OpenShift or Kubernetes, tests will be executed in an ephemeral namespace 

This framework follows the Quarkus version convention, so we can selectively specify the Quarkus version via the arguments:
- `-Dquarkus.platform.version=1.13.0.Final`
- `-Dquarkus-plugin.version=1.13.0.Final`
- `-Dquarkus.platform.group-id=io.quarkus`
- `-Dquarkus.platform.artifact-id=quarkus-universe-bom`

## Getting Started

In order to write Quarkus application in your tests, you first need to add the core dependency in your `pom.xml` file;

```xml
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.quarkus.qe</groupId>
	<artifactId>quarkus-test-core</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

The framework aims to think on scenarios to verify. One scenario could include a few Quarkus instances and other container resources:

```java
@QuarkusScenario
public class PingPongResourceIT {

    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingApp = new RestService();

    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PongResource.class)
    static final RestService pongApp = new RestService();

    // will include ping and pong resources
    @QuarkusApplication
    static final RestService pingPongApp = new RestService();

    // ...

}
```

As seen in the above example, everything is bounded to a Service object that will contain everything needed to interact with our resources.

Morever, the Native version of the above example:

```java
@NativeScenario
public class NativePingPongResourceIT extends PingPongResourceIT {

}
```

### Containers 

The framework also supports to deployment of third party components provided by docker. First, we need an additional module:

```xml
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.quarkus.qe</groupId>
	<artifactId>quarkus-test-containers</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

Now, we can deploy services via docker:

```java
@QuarkusScenario
public class GreetingResourceIT {

    private static final String CUSTOM_PROPERTY = "my.property";

    @Container(image = "quay.io/bitnami/consul:1.9.3", expectedLog = "Synced node info", port = 8500)
    static final DefaultService consul = new DefaultService();

    @QuarkusApplication
    static final RestService app = new RestService();

    // ...
}
```

### Enable/Disable Native tests via system properties

We can selectively disable/enable native tests via system properties and using the `@EnabledIfNativeScenarioPropertyIsTrue` annotation:

```java
@NativeScenario
@EnabledIfNativeScenarioPropertyIsTrue
public class NativePingPongResourceIT extends PingPongResourceIT {

}
```

This test will be executed only if the system property `ts.native.scenario.enabled` is `true`.

## Architecture

This framework is designed to follow **extension model** patterns. Therefore, we can extend any functionality just by adding other dependencies that extend the current functionality. As an example, Quarkus applications will be deployed locally, but if we add the OpenShift module. we can automatically deploy it in OpenShift/K8s just by adding the `@OpenShiftScenario`.

### Packages

The modules within the test framework must follow the next package convention:

- `io.quarkus.test.bootstrap` - manage the lifecycle of the tests
- `io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject` - services that are injectable at test method level
- `io.quarkus.test.configuration` - configuration facilities
- `io.quarkus.test.logging` - logging facilities and handlers
- `io.quarkus.test.scenarios` - scenarios that the module implement, eg: `@NativeScenario`, `@OpenShiftScenario`
- `io.quarkus.test.scenarios.annotations` - useful JUnit annotations to disable/enable scenarios
- `io.quarkus.test.services` - services that the module implement, eg: `@QuarkusApplication`, `@Container`
- `io.quarkus.test.services.<service-name>` - bindings to configure the `service-name` to be extended or supported
- `io.quarkus.test.utils` - more utilities

## Supported Deployment Environments

By default, the framework will run all the tests on bare metal (local machine). However, we can extend this functionality by adding other modules and annotating our tests.

### OpenShift

Requirements:
- OC CLI installed
- Be connected to an running OpenShift instance - `oc login ...`

Verified Environments:
- OCP 4.6+ 

Use this Maven dependency:

```xml
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.quarkus.qe</groupId>
	<artifactId>quarkus-test-openshift</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

And now, we can write also scenarios to be run in OpenShift by adding the `@OpenShiftScenario`.

#### Deployment Strategies

- **(Default) Using Build**

This strategy will build the Quarkus app artifacts locally and push it into OpenShift to generate the image that will be deployed. 

Example:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario // or @OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.Build)
public class OpenShiftPingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingApp = new RestService();

    @Test
    public void shouldPingWorks() {
        pingApp.given().get("/ping").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_OK).body(is("ping"));
        pingApp.given().get("/pong").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_NOT_FOUND);
    }
}
```

- **OpenShift Extension**

This strategy will delegate the deployment into the Quarkus OpenShift extension, so it will trigger a Maven command to run it. 

Example:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingOpenShiftExtension)
public class OpenShiftPingPongResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

In order to use this strategy, you need to add this Maven profile into the pom.xml:

```xml
<profile>
    <id>deploy-to-openshift-using-extension</id>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-openshift</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</profile>
```

| Important note: This strategy does not support custom sources to be selected, this means that the whole Maven module will be deployed. Therefore, if we have:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingOpenShiftExtension)
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingPongApp = new RestService();
    
    // ...
}
```

The test case will fail saying that this is not supported using the Using OpenShift strategy.

- **OpenShift Extension and Using Docker Build**

This is an extension of the `OpenShift Extension` previous deployment strategy. The only difference is that a Docker build strategy will be used:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingOpenShiftExtensionAndDockerBuildStrategy)
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingPongApp = new RestService();
    
    // ...
}
```

The same limitations as in `OpenShift Extension` strategy apply here too.

- **Container Registry**

This strategy will build the image locally and push it to an intermediary container registry (provided by a system property). Then, the image will be pulled from the container registry in OpenShift.

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingContainerRegistry)
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

When running these tests, the container registry must be supplied as a system property:

```
mvn clean verify -Dts.container.registry-url=quay.io/<your username>
```

These tests can be disabled if the above system property is not set using the `@DisabledIfNotContainerRegistry` annotation:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingContainerRegistry)
@DisabledIfNotContainerRegistry
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

#### Native Support

Regardless the deployment strategy you chose, you can extend your existing tests like in Native tests:
 
 ```java
@OpenShiftScenario
public class OpenShiftNativePingPongResourceIT extends NativePingPongResourceTest {
}
```

Or:

 ```java
@OpenShiftScenario
@NativeScenario
public class OpenShiftNativePingPongResourceIT extends PingPongResourceTest {
}
```

#### Interact with the OpenShift Client directly

We can inject the OpenShift client to interact with OpenShift. This can be useful to cope with more complex scenarios like scale up/down services.

```java
import io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject.OpenShiftClient;
import io.quarkus.test.scenarios.OpenShiftScenario;

@OpenShiftScenario
public class OpenShiftGreetingResourceIT extends GreetingResourceIT {
    @Test
    public void shouldInjectOpenShiftClient(OpenShiftClient client) {
        // ...
        client.scaleTo(app, 2);
    }
}
```

Another option is by injecting the client directly to the test class using the `@Inject` annotation:

```java
import io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject.OpenShiftClient;
import io.quarkus.test.scenarios.OpenShiftScenario;

@OpenShiftScenario
public class OpenShiftGreetingResourceIT extends GreetingResourceIT {

    @Inject
    static OpenShiftClient client;
    
    @Test
    public void shouldInjectOpenShiftClient() {
        // ...
        client.scaleTo(app, 2);
    }
}
```

| Note that the injection is only supported to static fields.

#### Enable/Disable OpenShift tests via system properties

We can selectively disable/enable OpenShift tests via system properties and using the `@EnabledIfOpenShiftScenarioPropertyIsTrue` annotation:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario
@EnabledIfOpenShiftScenarioPropertyIsTrue
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

This test will be executed only if the system property `ts.openshift.scenario.enabled` is `true`.

### Kubernetes

Requirements:
- Kubectl CLI installed
- Be connected to an running Kubernetes instance
- Public container registry where to push/pull images

Verified Environments:
- Kind using LoadBalancer: https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/loadbalancer/

Use this Maven dependency:

```xml
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.quarkus.qe</groupId>
	<artifactId>quarkus-test-kubernetes</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

And now, we can write also scenarios to be run in Kubernetes by adding the `@KubernetesScenario`:

```java
@KubernetesScenario
public class KubernetesPingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingApp = new RestService();

    @Test
    public void shouldPingWorks() {
        pingApp.given().get("/ping").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_OK).body(is("ping"));
        pingApp.given().get("/pong").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_NOT_FOUND);
    }
}
```

#### Deployment Strategies

- **(Default) Container Registry** 

Kubernetes needs a container registry where to push and pull images, so we need to provide a property like:

```
mvn clean verify -Dts.container.registry-url=quay.io/<your username>
```

The container registry must automatically exposed the containers publicly.

These tests can be disabled if the above system property is not set using the `@DisabledIfNotContainerRegistry` annotation.

#### Interact with the Kubernetes Client directly

We can inject the Kubectl client to interact with Kubernetes. This can be useful to cope with more complex scenarios like scale up/down services.

```java
import io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject.KubectlClient;
import io.quarkus.test.scenarios.KubernetesScenario;

@KubernetesScenario
public class KubernetesGreetingResourceIT extends GreetingResourceIT {

    @Test
    public void shouldInjectKubectlClient(KubectlClient client) {
        // ...
        client.scaleTo(app, 2);
    }
}
```

Another option is by injecting the client directly to the test class using the `@Inject` annotation:

```java
import io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject.KubectlClient;
import io.quarkus.test.scenarios.KubernetesScenario;

@KubernetesScenario
public class KubernetesGreetingResourceIT extends GreetingResourceIT {

    @Inject
    static KubectlClient client;
    
    // ...
}
```

| Note that the injection is only supported to static fields.

#### Enable/Disable Kubernetes tests via system properties

We can selectively disable/enable OpenShift tests via system properties and using the `@EnabledIfKubernetesScenarioPropertyIsTrue` annotation:

```java
@KubernetesScenario
@EnabledIfKubernetesScenarioPropertyIsTrue
public class KubernetesGreetingResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

This test will be executed only if the system property `ts.kubernetes.scenario.enabled` is `true`.

## Services entities

The objective of a service is to manage internal resources:

```java
@QuarkusApplication
static final DefaultService pingApp = new DefaultService();
```

This service will host the quarkus application internally, but it will also expose the functionality to interact with it: 
- `withProperty`: Intuitive usage of properties.

We can configure our resources using configuration of other resources:

```java
@Container(image = "quay.io/bitnami/consul:1.9.3", expectedLog = "Synced node info", port = 8500)
static final DefaultService consul = new DefaultService();

@QuarkusApplication
static final DefaultService app = new DefaultService().withProperty("quarkus.consul-config.agent.host-port",
        () -> consul.getHost() + ":" + consul.getPort());
```

The resources will be initiated in order of presence of the test class. 

- Service Lifecycle

The framework allows to add actions via hooks in every stage of the service lifecycle:

```java
@Container(image = "quay.io/bitnami/consul:1.9.3", expectedLog = "Synced node info", port = 8500)
static final DefaultService consul = new DefaultService().onPostStart(GreetingResourceTest::onLoadConfigureConsul);

private static final void onLoadConfigureConsul(Service service) {
    // ...
}
```

- Services are startable and stoppable by default

Any Quarkus application and containers can be stopped to cover more complex scenarios. The test framework will restart the services by you before starting a new test case.

### Rest Services

There is a custom service implementation where we can use REST assured:

```java
@QuarkusScenario
public class PingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication
    static final RestService pingApp = new RestService();

    @Test
    public void shouldPingWorks() {
        pingApp.given().get("/ping").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_OK).body(is("ping"));
    }
}
```

### Custom Services

In the same way, we can add default services to ease and share common functionality. As part of the test framework, we added the consul service as an example.

```java
public class YourCustomService extends BaseService<ConsulService> {

    // your new methods
}
```

And use it:

```java
@QuarkusScenario
public class GreetingResourceIT {

    @Container // ... or @QuarkusApplication
    static final YourCustomService app = new YourCustomService();
    
    // your methods will be available
}
```


## More Features

- Discovery of build time properties to build Quarkus applications

The test framework will leverage whether an application runner can be reused or it needs to trigger a new build. Note that for this feature, tests should be written as Integration Tests. 

- External Resources

We can use properties that require external resources using the `resource::` tag. For example: `.withProperty("to.property", "resource::/file.yaml");`. This works either using containers in bare metal or OpenShift/Kubernetes.

- File logging

When running a test, the output will be copied into Console and a file placed in `target/logs/tests.out`. 

For OpenShift and Kubernetes, when some test fail, the logs of all the pods within the test namespace will be copied in `target/logs` folder as well.

- Colourify logging

The test framework will output a different colour by service. This will extremely ease the troubleshooting of the logic.

You can enable the logging by adding a `test.properties` in your module with the next property:

```
ts.<YOUR SERVICE NAME>.log.enable=true
```

- Parallel test execution

We can verify several test modules in parallel doing:

```
mvn -T 1C clean verify
```

This Maven command would use 1 thread by CPU.

- Partial SSL support

This is only supported when running tests on bare metal:

```java
@QuarkusApplication(ssl = true)
static final RestService app = new RestService();

@Test
public void shouldSayHelloWorld() {
    app.https().given().get("/greeting").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_OK).body(is("Hello World!"));
}
```

## TODO
- Add example of microprofile rest client (to autopopulate host and port)
- Implement fail fast features
- Deploy to Maven central

Commit message:

Support custom templates for OpenShift and Kubernetes

README.md, after:

# Quarkus QE Test Framework

The framework is designed using Extension Model architecture patterns, so supporting additional features or deployment options like Kubernetes or AWS is just a matter of implementing extension points and providing the new Maven module in the classpath.

![Components](docs/components.png)

Main features:
- Easily deploy multiple Quarkus applications and third party components in a single test
- Write the test case once and run it everywhere (cloud, bare metal, etc)
- Developer and Test friendly
- Quarkus features focused (allow to define custom source classes, build/runtime properties, etc)
- Test isolation: for example, in OpenShift or Kubernetes, tests will be executed in an ephemeral namespace 

This framework follows the Quarkus version convention, so we can selectively specify the Quarkus version via the arguments:
- `-Dquarkus.platform.version=1.13.0.Final`
- `-Dquarkus-plugin.version=1.13.0.Final`
- `-Dquarkus.platform.group-id=io.quarkus`
- `-Dquarkus.platform.artifact-id=quarkus-universe-bom`

## Getting Started

In order to write Quarkus application in your tests, you first need to add the core dependency in your `pom.xml` file;

```xml
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.quarkus.qe</groupId>
	<artifactId>quarkus-test-core</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

The framework aims to think on scenarios to verify. One scenario could include a few Quarkus instances and other container resources:

```java
@QuarkusScenario
public class PingPongResourceIT {

    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingApp = new RestService();

    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PongResource.class)
    static final RestService pongApp = new RestService();

    // will include ping and pong resources
    @QuarkusApplication
    static final RestService pingPongApp = new RestService();

    // ...

}
```

As seen in the above example, everything is bounded to a Service object that will contain everything needed to interact with our resources.

Morever, the Native version of the above example:

```java
@NativeScenario
public class NativePingPongResourceIT extends PingPongResourceIT {

}
```

### Containers 

The framework also supports to deployment of third party components provided by docker. First, we need an additional module:

```xml
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.quarkus.qe</groupId>
	<artifactId>quarkus-test-containers</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

Now, we can deploy services via docker:

```java
@QuarkusScenario
public class GreetingResourceIT {

    private static final String CUSTOM_PROPERTY = "my.property";

    @Container(image = "quay.io/bitnami/consul:1.9.3", expectedLog = "Synced node info", port = 8500)
    static final DefaultService consul = new DefaultService();

    @QuarkusApplication
    static final RestService app = new RestService();

    // ...
}
```

#### Use custom templates for Containers

Sometimes deploying a third party into OpenShift or Kubernetes involves some complex configuration that is not required when deploying it on bare metal. For these scenarios, we allow to provide a custom template via `test.properties`:

```
ts.consul.openshift.template=/yourtemplate.yaml
```

Similarly, when deploying into kubernetes, we have the property `ts.consul.kubernetes.template`.

| Note that this is only supported for OpenShift and Kubernetes. 
| And the custom template must contain ONLY ONE deployment config (for OpenShift) or ONE deployment (for kubernetes).

Moreover, if the service that is exposing the port we want to target is named differently to our service, we can provide the service name via:

```
ts.consul.openshift.service=consul-http-service
```

Same with Kubernetes `ts.consul.kubernetes.service`.

### Enable/Disable Native tests via system properties

We can selectively disable/enable native tests via system properties and using the `@EnabledIfNativeScenarioPropertyIsTrue` annotation:

```java
@NativeScenario
@EnabledIfNativeScenarioPropertyIsTrue
public class NativePingPongResourceIT extends PingPongResourceIT {

}
```

This test will be executed only if the system property `ts.native.scenario.enabled` is `true`.

## Architecture

This framework is designed to follow **extension model** patterns. Therefore, we can extend any functionality just by adding other dependencies that extend the current functionality. As an example, Quarkus applications will be deployed locally, but if we add the OpenShift module. we can automatically deploy it in OpenShift/K8s just by adding the `@OpenShiftScenario`.

### Packages

The modules within the test framework must follow the next package convention:

- `io.quarkus.test.bootstrap` - manage the lifecycle of the tests
- `io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject` - services that are injectable at test method level
- `io.quarkus.test.configuration` - configuration facilities
- `io.quarkus.test.logging` - logging facilities and handlers
- `io.quarkus.test.scenarios` - scenarios that the module implement, eg: `@NativeScenario`, `@OpenShiftScenario`
- `io.quarkus.test.scenarios.annotations` - useful JUnit annotations to disable/enable scenarios
- `io.quarkus.test.services` - services that the module implement, eg: `@QuarkusApplication`, `@Container`
- `io.quarkus.test.services.<service-name>` - bindings to configure the `service-name` to be extended or supported
- `io.quarkus.test.utils` - more utilities

## Supported Deployment Environments

By default, the framework will run all the tests on bare metal (local machine). However, we can extend this functionality by adding other modules and annotating our tests.

### OpenShift

Requirements:
- OC CLI installed
- Be connected to an running OpenShift instance - `oc login ...`

Verified Environments:
- OCP 4.6+ 

Use this Maven dependency:

```xml
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.quarkus.qe</groupId>
	<artifactId>quarkus-test-openshift</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

And now, we can write also scenarios to be run in OpenShift by adding the `@OpenShiftScenario`.

#### Deployment Strategies

- **(Default) Using Build**

This strategy will build the Quarkus app artifacts locally and push it into OpenShift to generate the image that will be deployed. 

Example:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario // or @OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.Build)
public class OpenShiftPingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingApp = new RestService();

    @Test
    public void shouldPingWorks() {
        pingApp.given().get("/ping").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_OK).body(is("ping"));
        pingApp.given().get("/pong").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_NOT_FOUND);
    }
}
```

- **OpenShift Extension**

This strategy will delegate the deployment into the Quarkus OpenShift extension, so it will trigger a Maven command to run it. 

Example:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingOpenShiftExtension)
public class OpenShiftPingPongResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

In order to use this strategy, you need to add this Maven profile into the pom.xml:

```xml
<profile>
    <id>deploy-to-openshift-using-extension</id>
    <dependencies>
        <dependency>
            <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
            <artifactId>quarkus-openshift</artifactId>
        </dependency>
    </dependencies>
</profile>
```

| Important note: This strategy does not support custom sources to be selected, this means that the whole Maven module will be deployed. Therefore, if we have:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingOpenShiftExtension)
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingPongApp = new RestService();
    
    // ...
}
```

The test case will fail saying that this is not supported using the Using OpenShift strategy.

- **OpenShift Extension and Using Docker Build**

This is an extension of the `OpenShift Extension` previous deployment strategy. The only difference is that a Docker build strategy will be used:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingOpenShiftExtensionAndDockerBuildStrategy)
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingPongApp = new RestService();
    
    // ...
}
```

The same limitations as in `OpenShift Extension` strategy apply here too.

- **Container Registry**

This strategy will build the image locally and push it to an intermediary container registry (provided by a system property). Then, the image will be pulled from the container registry in OpenShift.

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingContainerRegistry)
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

When running these tests, the container registry must be supplied as a system property:

```
mvn clean verify -Dts.container.registry-url=quay.io/<your username>
```

These tests can be disabled if the above system property is not set using the `@DisabledIfNotContainerRegistry` annotation:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario(deployment = OpenShiftDeploymentStrategy.UsingContainerRegistry)
@DisabledIfNotContainerRegistry
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

#### Native Support

Regardless the deployment strategy you chose, you can extend your existing tests like in Native tests:
 
 ```java
@OpenShiftScenario
public class OpenShiftNativePingPongResourceIT extends NativePingPongResourceTest {
}
```

Or:

 ```java
@OpenShiftScenario
@NativeScenario
public class OpenShiftNativePingPongResourceIT extends PingPongResourceTest {
}
```

#### Interact with the OpenShift Client directly

We can inject the OpenShift client to interact with OpenShift. This can be useful to cope with more complex scenarios like scale up/down services.

```java
import io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject.OpenShiftClient;
import io.quarkus.test.scenarios.OpenShiftScenario;

@OpenShiftScenario
public class OpenShiftGreetingResourceIT extends GreetingResourceIT {
    @Test
    public void shouldInjectOpenShiftClient(OpenShiftClient client) {
        // ...
        client.scaleTo(app, 2);
    }
}
```

Another option is by injecting the client directly to the test class using the `@Inject` annotation:

```java
import io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject.OpenShiftClient;
import io.quarkus.test.scenarios.OpenShiftScenario;

@OpenShiftScenario
public class OpenShiftGreetingResourceIT extends GreetingResourceIT {

    @Inject
    static OpenShiftClient client;
    
    @Test
    public void shouldInjectOpenShiftClient() {
        // ...
        client.scaleTo(app, 2);
    }
}
```

| Note that the injection is only supported to static fields.

#### Enable/Disable OpenShift tests via system properties

We can selectively disable/enable OpenShift tests via system properties and using the `@EnabledIfOpenShiftScenarioPropertyIsTrue` annotation:

```java
@OpenShiftScenario
@EnabledIfOpenShiftScenarioPropertyIsTrue
public class OpenShiftUsingExtensionPingPongResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

This test will be executed only if the system property `ts.openshift.scenario.enabled` is `true`. 

### Kubernetes

Requirements:
- Kubectl CLI installed
- Be connected to an running Kubernetes instance
- Public container registry where to push/pull images

Verified Environments:
- Kind using LoadBalancer: https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/loadbalancer/

Use this Maven dependency:

```xml
<dependency>
	<groupId>io.quarkus.qe</groupId>
	<artifactId>quarkus-test-kubernetes</artifactId>
</dependency>
```

And now, we can write also scenarios to be run in Kubernetes by adding the `@KubernetesScenario`:

```java
@KubernetesScenario
public class KubernetesPingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication(classes = PingResource.class)
    static final RestService pingApp = new RestService();

    @Test
    public void shouldPingWorks() {
        pingApp.given().get("/ping").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_OK).body(is("ping"));
        pingApp.given().get("/pong").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_NOT_FOUND);
    }
}
```

#### Deployment Strategies

- **(Default) Container Registry** 

Kubernetes needs a container registry where to push and pull images, so we need to provide a property like:

```
mvn clean verify -Dts.container.registry-url=quay.io/<your username>
```

The container registry must automatically exposed the containers publicly.

These tests can be disabled if the above system property is not set using the `@DisabledIfNotContainerRegistry` annotation.

#### Interact with the Kubernetes Client directly

We can inject the Kubectl client to interact with Kubernetes. This can be useful to cope with more complex scenarios like scale up/down services.

```java
import io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject.KubectlClient;
import io.quarkus.test.scenarios.KubernetesScenario;

@KubernetesScenario
public class KubernetesGreetingResourceIT extends GreetingResourceIT {

    @Test
    public void shouldInjectKubectlClient(KubectlClient client) {
        // ...
        client.scaleTo(app, 2);
    }
}
```

Another option is by injecting the client directly to the test class using the `@Inject` annotation:

```java
import io.quarkus.test.bootstrap.inject.KubectlClient;
import io.quarkus.test.scenarios.KubernetesScenario;

@KubernetesScenario
public class KubernetesGreetingResourceIT extends GreetingResourceIT {

    @Inject
    static KubectlClient client;
    
    // ...
}
```

| Note that the injection is only supported to static fields.

#### Enable/Disable Kubernetes tests via system properties

We can selectively disable/enable OpenShift tests via system properties and using the `@EnabledIfKubernetesScenarioPropertyIsTrue` annotation:

```java
@KubernetesScenario
@EnabledIfKubernetesScenarioPropertyIsTrue
public class KubernetesGreetingResourceIT {
    // ...
}
```

This test will be executed only if the system property `ts.kubernetes.scenario.enabled` is `true`.

## Services entities

The objective of a service is to manage internal resources:

```java
@QuarkusApplication
static final DefaultService pingApp = new DefaultService();
```

This service will host the quarkus application internally, but it will also expose the functionality to interact with it: 
- `withProperty`: Intuitive usage of properties.

We can configure our resources using configuration of other resources:

```java
@Container(image = "quay.io/bitnami/consul:1.9.3", expectedLog = "Synced node info", port = 8500)
static final DefaultService consul = new DefaultService();

@QuarkusApplication
static final DefaultService app = new DefaultService().withProperty("quarkus.consul-config.agent.host-port",
        () -> consul.getHost() + ":" + consul.getPort());
```

The resources will be initiated in order of presence of the test class. 

- Service Lifecycle

The framework allows to add actions via hooks in every stage of the service lifecycle:

```java
@Container(image = "quay.io/bitnami/consul:1.9.3", expectedLog = "Synced node info", port = 8500)
static final DefaultService consul = new DefaultService().onPostStart(GreetingResourceTest::onLoadConfigureConsul);

private static final void onLoadConfigureConsul(Service service) {
    // ...
}
```

- Services are startable and stoppable by default

Any Quarkus application and containers can be stopped to cover more complex scenarios. The test framework will restart the services by you before starting a new test case.

### Rest Services

There is a custom service implementation where we can use REST assured:

```java
@QuarkusScenario
public class PingPongResourceIT {
    @QuarkusApplication
    static final RestService pingApp = new RestService();

    @Test
    public void shouldPingWorks() {
        pingApp.given().get("/ping").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_OK).body(is("ping"));
    }
}
```

### Custom Services

In the same way, we can add default services to ease and share common functionality. As part of the test framework, we added the consul service as an example.

```java
public class YourCustomService extends BaseService<ConsulService> {

    // your new methods
}
```

And use it:

```java
@QuarkusScenario
public class GreetingResourceIT {

    @Container // ... or @QuarkusApplication
    static final YourCustomService app = new YourCustomService();
    
    // your methods will be available
}
```


## More Features

- Discovery of build time properties to build Quarkus applications

The test framework will leverage whether an application runner can be reused or it needs to trigger a new build. Note that for this feature, tests should be written as Integration Tests. 

- External Resources

We can use properties that require external resources using the `resource::` tag. For example: `.withProperty("to.property", "resource::/file.yaml");`. This works either using containers in bare metal or OpenShift/Kubernetes.

- File logging

When running a test, the output will be copied into Console and a file placed in `target/logs/tests.out`. 

For OpenShift and Kubernetes, when some test fail, the logs of all the pods within the test namespace will be copied in `target/logs` folder as well.

- Colourify logging

The test framework will output a different colour by service. This will extremely ease the troubleshooting of the logic.

You can enable the logging by adding a `test.properties` in your module with the next property:

```
ts.<YOUR SERVICE NAME>.log.enable=true
```

- Parallel test execution

We can verify several test modules in parallel doing:

```
mvn -T 1C clean verify
```

This Maven command would use 1 thread by CPU.

- Partial SSL support

This is only supported when running tests on bare metal:

```java
@QuarkusApplication(ssl = true)
static final RestService app = new RestService();

@Test
public void shouldSayHelloWorld() {
    app.https().given().get("/greeting").then().statusCode(HttpStatus.SC_OK).body(is("Hello World!"));
}
```

## TODO
- Add example of microprofile rest client (to autopopulate host and port)
- Implement fail fast features
- Deploy to Maven central
